README.md, before:

# bcbio.variation

A Clojure interface to the [Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)][1] to analyze
variant data in [VCF files][2]. It supports scoring for the
[Archon Genomic X PRIZE competition][5] but is also a general framework
for variant file comparison.

* [presentation from Bioinformatics Open Source Conference 2012][p1]
* [presentation overview of the project][4]
* [howto description of interfacing with GATK][6]
* [code documentation][3]

[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/chapmanb/bcbio.variation.png)](http://travis-ci.org/chapmanb/bcbio.variation)

[1]: http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsa/wiki/index.php/The_Genome_Analysis_Toolkit
[2]: http://www.1000genomes.org/wiki/Analysis/Variant%20Call%20Format/vcf-variant-call-format-version-40
[3]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation
[4]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation/presentations/gatk_clojure.pdf
[5]: http://genomics.xprize.org/
[6]: http://bcbio.wordpress.com/2012/03/04/extending-the-gatk-for-custom-variant-comparisons-using-clojure/
[p1]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation/presentations/variation_bosc_2012/variation_chapman.pdf

## Usage

### Setup

Requires Java 1.6 or better and [Leiningen][u1]. We use the 2.x version of
Leiningen, so be sure to get the preview release:

    $ wget https://raw.github.com/technomancy/leiningen/preview/bin/lein
    $ chmod 755 lein && sudo mv lein /usr/local/bin

Then use Leiningen to install all dependencies:

    $ lein deps

### Generate summary of concordance between variant calls

A [YAML configuration file][u2] specifies the variant files for
comparison. The project contains example configuration and associated
variant files that demonstrate the features of the library.

An example of scoring a phased diploid genome against a haploid reference
genome:
    
    $ lein variant-compare config/reference-grading.yaml

An example of assessing variant calls produced by different calling algorithms:

    $ lein variant-compare config/method-comparison.yaml
    
### Normalize a variant file

A tricky part of variant comparisons is that VCF format is flexible enough to
allow multiple representations. As a result two files may contain the same
variants, but one might have it present in a multi-nucleotide polymorphism while
another represents it as an individual variant. 

To produce a stable, decomposed variant file for comparison run:

    $ lein variant-prep your_variants.vcf your_reference.fasta
    
This will also handle re-ordering variants to match the reference file ordering,
essential for feeding into tools like GATK, and remapping hg19 to GRCh37
chromosome names. To additionally filter outputs by indel size, pass an argument
specifying the maximum indel size to include: `--max-indel 30`.

### Web interface

A web interface automates the process of preparing configuration files and
running a variant comparison:
    
    $ lein variant-web config/web-processing.yaml

### Run GATK walker for variant statistics

    $ lein uberjar
    $ java -jar target/bcbio.variation-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar -T VcfSimpleStats
      -R test/data/GRCh37.fa --variant test/data/gatk-calls.vcf --out test.png

### Run custom GATK annotator

    $ lein uberjar
    $ java -jar target/bcbio.variation-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar -T VariantAnnotator
       -A MeanNeighboringBaseQuality -R test/data/GRCh37.fa -I test/data/aligned-reads.bam
       --variant test/data/gatk-calls.vcf -o annotated-file.vcf

## Configuration file

A YAML configuration file defines targets for comparison processing. Two example
files for [reference grading][u4] and [comparison of calling methods][u3]
provide example starting points and details on available options are below:

    dir:
      base: Base directory to allow use of relative paths (optional).
      out: Working directory to write output.
      prep: Prep directory where files will be pre-processed.
    experiments: # one or more experiments
     - sample: Name of current sample.
       ref: Reference genome in FASTA format.
       intervals: Intervals to process in BED format (optional).
       align: Alignments for all calls in BAM format (optional).
       summary-level: Amount of summary information to provide,
                      [full,quick] (default:full)
       params: # Processing parameters associated with this experiment
         max-indel: Maximum indel size to include in non-structural variant
                    comparisons (default: 30)
       approach: Type of comparison to do [compare,grade]. Default compare.
       calls: # two or more calls to compare
         - name: Name of call type
           file: One or more input files in VCF format
           align: Alignment for specific call in BAM format (optional).
           ref: Reference genome if different than experiment ref (optional)
           intervals: Genome intervals to process in BED format (optional).
           metadata: Dictionary of annotations associated with the call set.
                     Finalizers use these to provide annotation specific
                     filtering of calls.
           filters: Provide hard filtering of variants prior to comparison with 
                    specified JEXL GATK expressions.
           format-filters: Provide hard filtering of variants based on
                           attributes in the genotype FORMAT field.
           recall: Recall, using GATK, all non-called variant positions after
                   merging multiple input calls. (boolean; default false)
           annotate: Annotate calls with GATK annotations (boolean; default false).
           normalize: Normalize MNPs and indels (boolean: default true).
           prep: Prep with in-order chromosomes and sample names (boolean; default false).
           prep-sort-pos: Sort by position during prep. Required if variants are
                          not coordinate sorted within chromosomes. (boolean; default false).
           prep-sv-genotype: Normalize structural variant genotypes to a single
                             ref call (boolean; default false).
           prep-allele-count: Number of alleles to convert calls to during
                              prep work (default 2)
           preclean: Remove problematic characters from input VCFs
                     (boolean; default false). 
           remove-refcalls: Remove reference, non-variant calls.
                            (boolean; default false). 
           make-haploid: Convert a set of diploid calls to haploid variants
                        (boolean; default false)

## Finalizer configuration

In addition to the pairwise comparisons, the configuration allows specification
of additional filtration and all-by-all comparisons based on the pairwise
results. Like `calls`, specify these under an experiment with the `finalize`
tag. Available methods are:

* `multiple` which does a comparison of a target call method to all other
  calls. A comparison of GATK calls to all other methods looks like:

        finalize:
          - method: multiple
            target: gatk
            ignore: []

  and produces three output files:

  - true positives -- calls detected in all methods
  - false negatives -- calls not found in gatk, but detected in all other methods
  - false positives -- calls found in gatk but callable and discordant
   in one of the other methods

  The `ignore` option provides a list of methods to ignore in the all-by-all
  overlap comparison.

* `recal-filter` to do post-comparisons filtering of calls. This can use either
  the results of a pairwise comparison or `multiple` comparison. An example
  demonstrating all of the filtering options re-filters a GATK versus FreeBayes
  comparison:

        finalize: 
          - method: recal-filter
            target: [gatk, freebayes]
            params:
              filters: [HRun > 5.0]
              annotations:  [QD, HaplotypeScore, MQRankSum, ReadPosRankSum]
              lenient: false
              classifiers: [AD, DP, QUAL]
              xspecific: true
              trusted:
                total: 0.75
                technology: 0.65
    
The options for filtering are:

  - `filters` -- Perform hard filtering of the file with specified expressions.
  - `annotations` -- Perform [GATK Variant Quality Score Recalibration][u5]
   using the supplied annotations. The `lenient` option allows VQSR on samples
   with a lower number of total variations and is useful in VQSR fails.
  - `classifiers` -- Perform classification of true/false reads
   based on the provided attributes.
  - `trusted` -- Metadata annotation values that specify trusted variants not
   subjected to filtering. The example retains variants present in more than 75%
   of calls or 65% of different technologies.
  - `xspecific` -- Identify and filter calls specific to a technology or calling
    method, when combining multiple callers and technologies.

  You can specify the background to use for training with `support`. There are
  two options:

  - `support: gatk` -- Use an all-by-all comparison based on GATK to establish
   true and false positives.
  - `support: [gatk, freebayes]` -- Use the gatk/freebayes pairwise comparison
   for true and false positives.
           
[u1]: https://github.com/technomancy/leiningen
[u2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML
[u3]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio.variation/blob/master/config/method-comparison.yaml
[u4]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio.variation/blob/master/config/reference-grading.yaml
[u5]: http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsa/wiki/index.php/Variant_quality_score_recalibration

## Utilities

This library also contains useful command line utilities to help with variant
preparation and analysis:

- Create a BAM file compatible with GATK. This converts coordinates between hg19
  and GRCh37 for human samples, reorders chromosomes relative to the input file
  and adds run group information with a defined sample name:

      $ lein variant-reorder your_file.bam /path/to/GRCh37.fa SampleName
    
- Provide a summary CSV file of call information for a VCF file, including
  mappings back to an original set of pairwise analyses:

      $ lein variant-utils callsummary variants.vcf original-combined-config.yaml

## Contributors

- Brad Chapman
- Chris Fields
- Kevin Lynagh
- Justin Zook

## License

The code is freely available under the [MIT license][l1].

[l1]: http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.html

Commit message:

Provide full download jar and generalized command line access

README.md, after:

# bcbio.variation

A Clojure interface to the [Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK)][1] to analyze
variant data in [VCF files][2]. It supports scoring for the
[Archon Genomic X PRIZE competition][5] but is also a general framework
for variant file comparison.

* [presentation from Bioinformatics Open Source Conference 2012][p1]
* [presentation overview of the project][4]
* [howto description of interfacing with GATK][6]
* [code documentation][3]

[![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/chapmanb/bcbio.variation.png)](http://travis-ci.org/chapmanb/bcbio.variation)

[1]: http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsa/wiki/index.php/The_Genome_Analysis_Toolkit
[2]: http://www.1000genomes.org/wiki/Analysis/Variant%20Call%20Format/vcf-variant-call-format-version-40
[3]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation
[4]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation/presentations/gatk_clojure.pdf
[5]: http://genomics.xprize.org/
[6]: http://bcbio.wordpress.com/2012/03/04/extending-the-gatk-for-custom-variant-comparisons-using-clojure/
[p1]: http://chapmanb.github.com/bcbio.variation/presentations/variation_bosc_2012/variation_chapman.pdf

## Obtaining

### Latest source

The latest version is available directly from GitHub. It requires Java 1.6 or
better and [Leiningen][u1]. We use the 2.x version of Leiningen, so be sure to
get the preview release:

    $ wget https://raw.github.com/technomancy/leiningen/preview/bin/lein
    $ chmod 755 lein && sudo mv lein /usr/local/bin

Then use Leiningen to install all dependencies:

    $ lein deps

### Download

You can download a release jar from [the GitHub download page][dl] and run
directly from the command line:

    $ java -jar bcbio.variation-VERSION-standalone.jar [arguments]
    
The jar contains a full GATK commandline with additional walkers, as well as
custom command line programs. See the usage section below for supported
arguments.

[dl]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio.variation/downloads
    
### As a library

To use as a library from Leiningen or Maven, follow the instructions on the
[clojars page][clojars].
 
[clojars]: https://clojars.org/bcbio.variation

## Usage

### Generate summary of concordance between variant calls

A [YAML configuration file][u2] specifies the variant files for
comparison. The project contains example configuration and associated
variant files that demonstrate the features of the library.

An example of scoring a phased diploid genome against a haploid reference
genome:
    
    $ lein variant-compare config/reference-grading.yaml

An example of assessing variant calls produced by different calling algorithms:

    $ lein variant-compare config/method-comparison.yaml
    
### Normalize a variant file

A tricky part of variant comparisons is that VCF format is flexible enough to
allow multiple representations. As a result two files may contain the same
variants, but one might have it present in a multi-nucleotide polymorphism while
another represents it as an individual variant. 

To produce a stable, decomposed variant file for comparison run:

    $ lein variant-prep your_variants.vcf your_reference.fasta
    
This will also handle re-ordering variants to match the reference file ordering,
essential for feeding into tools like GATK, and remapping hg19 to GRCh37
chromosome names. To additionally filter outputs by indel size, pass an argument
specifying the maximum indel size to include: `--max-indel 30`.

### Web interface

A web interface automates the process of preparing configuration files and
running a variant comparison:
    
    $ lein variant-web config/web-processing.yaml

### Run GATK walker for variant statistics

    $ lein uberjar
    $ java -jar target/bcbio.variation-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar -T VcfSimpleStats
      -R test/data/GRCh37.fa --variant test/data/gatk-calls.vcf --out test.png

### Run custom GATK annotator

    $ lein uberjar
    $ java -jar target/bcbio.variation-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT-standalone.jar -T VariantAnnotator
       -A MeanNeighboringBaseQuality -R test/data/GRCh37.fa -I test/data/aligned-reads.bam
       --variant test/data/gatk-calls.vcf -o annotated-file.vcf

## Configuration file

A YAML configuration file defines targets for comparison processing. Two example
files for [reference grading][u4] and [comparison of calling methods][u3]
provide example starting points and details on available options are below:

    dir:
      base: Base directory to allow use of relative paths (optional).
      out: Working directory to write output.
      prep: Prep directory where files will be pre-processed.
    experiments: # one or more experiments
     - sample: Name of current sample.
       ref: Reference genome in FASTA format.
       intervals: Intervals to process in BED format (optional).
       align: Alignments for all calls in BAM format (optional).
       summary-level: Amount of summary information to provide,
                      [full,quick] (default:full)
       params: # Processing parameters associated with this experiment
         max-indel: Maximum indel size to include in non-structural variant
                    comparisons (default: 30)
       approach: Type of comparison to do [compare,grade]. Default compare.
       calls: # two or more calls to compare
         - name: Name of call type
           file: One or more input files in VCF format
           align: Alignment for specific call in BAM format (optional).
           ref: Reference genome if different than experiment ref (optional)
           intervals: Genome intervals to process in BED format (optional).
           metadata: Dictionary of annotations associated with the call set.
                     Finalizers use these to provide annotation specific
                     filtering of calls.
           filters: Provide hard filtering of variants prior to comparison with 
                    specified JEXL GATK expressions.
           format-filters: Provide hard filtering of variants based on
                           attributes in the genotype FORMAT field.
           recall: Recall, using GATK, all non-called variant positions after
                   merging multiple input calls. (boolean; default false)
           annotate: Annotate calls with GATK annotations (boolean; default false).
           normalize: Normalize MNPs and indels (boolean: default true).
           prep: Prep with in-order chromosomes and sample names (boolean; default false).
           prep-sort-pos: Sort by position during prep. Required if variants are
                          not coordinate sorted within chromosomes. (boolean; default false).
           prep-sv-genotype: Normalize structural variant genotypes to a single
                             ref call (boolean; default false).
           prep-allele-count: Number of alleles to convert calls to during
                              prep work (default 2)
           preclean: Remove problematic characters from input VCFs
                     (boolean; default false). 
           remove-refcalls: Remove reference, non-variant calls.
                            (boolean; default false). 
           make-haploid: Convert a set of diploid calls to haploid variants
                        (boolean; default false)

## Finalizer configuration

In addition to the pairwise comparisons, the configuration allows specification
of additional filtration and all-by-all comparisons based on the pairwise
results. Like `calls`, specify these under an experiment with the `finalize`
tag. Available methods are:

* `multiple` which does a comparison of a target call method to all other
  calls. A comparison of GATK calls to all other methods looks like:

        finalize:
          - method: multiple
            target: gatk
            ignore: []

  and produces three output files:

  - true positives -- calls detected in all methods
  - false negatives -- calls not found in gatk, but detected in all other methods
  - false positives -- calls found in gatk but callable and discordant
   in one of the other methods

  The `ignore` option provides a list of methods to ignore in the all-by-all
  overlap comparison.

* `recal-filter` to do post-comparisons filtering of calls. This can use either
  the results of a pairwise comparison or `multiple` comparison. An example
  demonstrating all of the filtering options re-filters a GATK versus FreeBayes
  comparison:

        finalize: 
          - method: recal-filter
            target: [gatk, freebayes]
            params:
              filters: [HRun > 5.0]
              annotations:  [QD, HaplotypeScore, MQRankSum, ReadPosRankSum]
              lenient: false
              classifiers: [AD, DP, QUAL]
              xspecific: true
              trusted:
                total: 0.75
                technology: 0.65
    
The options for filtering are:

  - `filters` -- Perform hard filtering of the file with specified expressions.
  - `annotations` -- Perform [GATK Variant Quality Score Recalibration][u5]
   using the supplied annotations. The `lenient` option allows VQSR on samples
   with a lower number of total variations and is useful in VQSR fails.
  - `classifiers` -- Perform classification of true/false reads
   based on the provided attributes.
  - `trusted` -- Metadata annotation values that specify trusted variants not
   subjected to filtering. The example retains variants present in more than 75%
   of calls or 65% of different technologies.
  - `xspecific` -- Identify and filter calls specific to a technology or calling
    method, when combining multiple callers and technologies.

  You can specify the background to use for training with `support`. There are
  two options:

  - `support: gatk` -- Use an all-by-all comparison based on GATK to establish
   true and false positives.
  - `support: [gatk, freebayes]` -- Use the gatk/freebayes pairwise comparison
   for true and false positives.
           
[u1]: https://github.com/technomancy/leiningen
[u2]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML
[u3]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio.variation/blob/master/config/method-comparison.yaml
[u4]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio.variation/blob/master/config/reference-grading.yaml
[u5]: http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsa/wiki/index.php/Variant_quality_score_recalibration

## Utilities

This library also contains useful command line utilities to help with variant
preparation and analysis:

- Create a BAM file compatible with GATK. This converts coordinates between hg19
  and GRCh37 for human samples, reorders chromosomes relative to the input file
  and adds run group information with a defined sample name:

      $ lein variant-reorder your_file.bam /path/to/GRCh37.fa SampleName
    
- Provide a summary CSV file of call information for a VCF file, including
  mappings back to an original set of pairwise analyses:

      $ lein variant-utils callsummary variants.vcf original-combined-config.yaml

## Contributors

- Brad Chapman
- Chris Fields
- Kevin Lynagh
- Justin Zook

## License

The code is freely available under the [MIT license][l1].

[l1]: http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.html
